---
title: "SAP ABAP @ Home 2025"
layout: post
published: true
date: 2025-04-15 21:32:35 +0200
categories:
  - application
  - sap
  - howto
  - debian
  - software
tags:
  - sap
  - java
  - debian
  - docker
  - vbox
  - job
lang: en
ref: sap-abap-home-2025
---

{% include image.html align='alignright' url='/assets/media/pics/2025/dockerised-sap.jpeg' img='/assets/media/pics/2025/dockerised-sap.jpeg' title='Random logo generated by an AI...' caption='Random logo generated by an AI...' maxwidth='300px' %}

This year I started on a new journey in the [SAP](https://www.sap.com) biz.
To get a better feeling for the SAP ecosystem, I wanted to experiment and mess around on my own.
And to avoid disrupting others and to have full control without needing to ask for permissions, I decided to set up an SAP system locally.
However, that turned out to be quite a challenge, especially when aiming for a proper (v)host setup.
After numerous attempts, I eventually found a reliable way using Docker.
Here's a rough guide based on my experience.


#### Prerequisites

Before diving into the setup, ensure you're properly equipped with all technical requirements:

- **Disk Space**: At least 100GB, but I'd recommend 200+GB.
- **RAM**: They suggest 32GB. I have 250GB, and it's been running smoothly ;-)
- **CPU**: A couple of fast cores.
- **Time**: Everything SAP related requires patience and time.


#### Step 1: Start the SAP System using Docker

The easiest way to get started is by using the Docker image provided by SAP.
You'll find it at the docker hub [sapse/abap-cloud-developer-trial](https://hub.docker.com/r/sapse/abap-cloud-developer-trial).
Before you can spawn a container, you should increase a couple of system limits by running the following as root:

```bash
sysctl -w kernel.shmmni=32768 
sysctl -w fs.aio-max-nr=18446744073709551615
sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=2147483647
```

Then, as described on the docker hub readme, run the following command to start a container:

```bash
docker run --stop-timeout 3600 -it --name a4h -h vhcala4hci -p 3200:3200 -p 3300:3300 -p 8443:8443 -p 30213:30213 -p 50000:50000 -p 50001:50001 sapse/abap-cloud-developer-trial:ABAPTRIAL_2022_SP01
```

Give it time. A lot of time...
At some point it will tell you that it's ready by printing something along those lines:

```bash
*** All services have been started. ***
***
*** To stop and be able to safely start again use Ctrl-C
*** Or use the stop command with timeout: docker stop -t 7200 ...
***
*** Have fun! ***
```

#### Step 2: Setting Up a Virtual Box with the SAP GUI

While I believe it would be possible to install the SAP GUI directly on your host, I recommend using a virtual environment to guard your host system. From my experiments I learned that SAP software loves to mess around in your file system and it will be virtually impossible to clean that up..

1. **Create a VM**: I used a Debian virtual box for this purpose.
2. **Install Java**: I've been successful with OpenJDK 17.
3. **Download SAP GUI for Java**: Get it from [SAP's trial ](https://developers.sap.com/trials-downloads.html).
4. **Install on the VM**: Copy the downloaded rar archive to your virtual machine, unpack it (eg. using unrar) and run the [JAR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JAR_(file_format)) file to start the installation:
    ```bash
    java -jar PlatinGUI-Linux-x86_64-7.80rev7.jar
    ```

5. **Start SAP GUI**: `cd` into the install location (probably `~/SAPClients/SAPGUI/bin`) and run:
    ```bash
    ./guistart /H/x.x.x.x/S/3200
    ```
    Replace `x.x.x.x` with the IP address that resolved to your host machine. Depending on your VM config, it might be something like `10.0.2.2` (VBox NAT) or maybe something starting with `192.168...`.

#### Step 3: Updating the License

Follow the procedure from the Docker Hub to update the license:

1. Login on client `000` as `SAP*` with the password `ABAPtr2022#01`.
2. Run Transaction `SLICENSE`.
3. Get a license from [minisap](https://go.support.sap.com/minisap/#/minisap). Choose `A4H`, fill the form, and download the license.
4. Back in the `SLICENSE` transaction in SAP GUI, click install and choose the downloaded file.
5. Log off from the `SAP*` account (`System -> Logoff`) and start a new SAP GUI session. Login on client `001` as `DEVELOPER` with the same password `ABAPtr2022#01`.

And that's it! You should now have a locally running SAP system.
I recommend to stop the docker container using `docker stop -t 7200 a4h` and then commit the changes into a new image, ie. 

```bash
docker commit a4h my-sap
```

Afterwards you can spawn a container of the `my-sap` image, properly setup with a valid license and stuff, even if you accidentally clean the old container.

This setup should allow you to experiment and develop in a controlled environment without affecting a main system.
Happy coding <3





