---
layout: post
title: 'aptitude compendium'
categories:
  - Junk

---

This is a small summary of some features concerning Debian's package management system.


I decided to publish my knowledge about aptitude and it's friends to einstieg bieten

<h2>Preface</h2>
install, uninstall, purge

<h2>sources.list</h2>
located in /etc/apt/sources.list

The 'preferences' file is where the actual pinning takes place. Here's an example:

 Package: *
 Pin: release a=testing
 Pin-Priority: 900

 Package: *
 Pin: release a=unstable
 Pin-Priority: 800

Package defaults to any, as specified by the asterisk. Pin specifies the release (testing and unstable). Pin-Priority specifies the priority level. 'apt-get' defaults to something along the lines of "highest package version wins". The above restructures this priority so that packages in testing are given a higher priority.

You should also refer to the apt_preferences(5) manpage. 

<h2>apt's interface</h2>
There are three major tools to interact with Debian's package management system: synaptic, apt-get and aptitude.
Synaptic is a great <abbr title="Graphical User Interface">GUI</abbr>, but since I'm not using it I'm the wrong person to explain it.
The tool aptitude is a ncurses based apt-get interface. At least the most important tasks can be done with both of the tools. I prefer aptitude, so my explanation consider this one.

<h5>aptitude interface</h5>


<h5>Command line</h5>
To update the package list you can do the following:
aptitude update

To upgrade your system to the newest release use the action 'safe-upgrade', the previously used action 'upgrade' has become deprecated. This will upgrade a package only if other packages are not affected. That means if it is necessary to add or remove another package because of dependencies, nothing is done:
aptitude safe-upgrade

To upgrade anyway you can force aptitude by:
aptitude full-upgrade

Searching can be done with the action search. To search for packages with "ssh" in the name:
/tmp % aptitude search ssh
p   aolserver4-nssha1                                                                 - AOLserver4 module: performs SHA1 hashes Provides a Tcl                                      
p   autossh                                                                           - Automatically restart SSH sessions and tunnels                                              
p   clusterssh                                                                        - administer multiple ssh or rsh shells simultaneously                                         
p   crosshurd                                                                         - Install a Debian system                                  
#...

You may also want to filter for packages that are not yet installed:
/tmp % aptitude search \\!~i~ssh
p   ash                                                                               - compatibility package for dash                                                              
p   autojump                                                                          - shell extension to jump to frequently used directories                                      
p   bash-static                                                                       - The GNU Bourne Again SHell (static version)                                                 
p   busybox-static                                                                    - Standalone rescue shell with tons of builtin utilities                                              
p   csh                                                                               - Shell with C-like syntax, standard login shell on BSD systems      
#...

How to free disk space
aptitude clean --purge-unused


<h4>Further tools</h4>
apt-cache show abcde
apt-show-versions
welche Pakete sind upgradeable? (von welcher Version zu welcher?)
apt-show-versions -u

apt-config
apt-listbugs
apt-listchanges
apt-rdepends

<h2>useful dpkg commands</h2>
There are two important task, that dpkg is really good in. You may have wondered which package installed a specific file, here is how you can find out:



{% highlight bash %}
/tmp % dpkg -S /bin/bash
bash: /bin/bash
{% endhighlight %}



So you see, the file  `/bin/bash`  comes with the package  `bash` .
The other way round, which files will be installed by an specific package:



{% highlight bash %}
/tmp % dpkg -L bash
/.
/etc
/etc/bash.bashrc
/etc/skel
/etc/skel/.profile
/etc/skel/.bashrc
/etc/skel/.bash_logout
/bin
/bin/bash
#...
{% endhighlight %}



And it's obvious that the package  `bash`  brings a lot of more files to your system.

<h2>Rebuilding packages</h2>

<h2>Tidy up</h2>

<h2>Problems</h2>
<h4>GPG-key error</h4>
Sometimes you try to install from an source with an unknown GPG-key, so you'll get an error like this:



{% highlight bash %}
W: There is no public key available for the following key IDs: A70DAF536070D3A1
{% endhighlight %}



That is very important! Without that key you are not able to verify whether a package was downloaded correctly and nobody on it's way through the network has modified it..
To get rid of it, you have to add this key to you gpg-keyring and also add it to the known keys for aptitude:



{% highlight bash %}
gpg --recv-key --keyserver wwwkeys.eu.pgp.net A70DAF536070D3A1
gpg --export A70DAF536070D3A1 | apt-key add -
{% endhighlight %}





<h1>References</h1>
<dl>
 <dt><a name='SHORT'>[SHORT]</a></dt>
 	<dd>WHO
 		<em>TITLE</em>
 		WHERE
		LINK
	</dd>
 <dt><a name=''>[]</a></dt>
 	<dd>
		<em></em>
		
		
 	</dd>
</dl>

<div class="download"><strong>Download:</strong>

<small>(Please take a look at the <a href="/man-page/">man-page</a>. Browse <a href="https://bt.binfalse.de/">bugs and feature requests</a>.)</small>
</div>
